Week1 - Understanding Causation and Defining a Research Question, automated transcript
2-Sep-2024
---

Hi everyone and welcome to Fundamentals of Epidemiology, Topic 1. I'm Tracy
Farahurt,
I'm an epidemiologist and my research looks at understanding health inequalities
and evaluating
interventions that might reduce some of these inequalities. And I work mainly
with routine
data, so data that's already collected, rather than data that we would have to
subsequently
collect, but we will look at these different types of studies as we go on. So a
lot of the
examples that I'm going to give you in these weekly lectures are going to be
from work that
I've done, but mainly around one health condition, I'll come back to that. The
aim of these mini
lectures is to introduce some of the concepts covered in each of the weeks. I'm
going to
provide you with examples of some of the types of studies covered in the course
from the perspective
of just one health condition. But I'd like to reiterate, this is not a
replacement for your
course content. It's very important that as well as looking at this video, you
also look at the
course content because it provides much more detail, links to further reading,
as well as
examples of self-study and the discussion groups which are so important, as they
all embed your
learning even further. So I'm going to take the example of cervical cancer as
our case study in
these weekly lectures. Now to give you a little bit of background, cervical
cancer is found
anywhere in the cervix, which is the opening between the vagina and the womb of
the uterus.
Now, almost all of these cases of cervical cancer are linked to an infection
from high-risk
human papilloma virus or HPV, and it's an extremely common virus transmitted
through sexual
contact. Most HPV infections result spontaneously and can cause no symptoms, but
persistent
infection can cause cervical cancer. Now that information is known now, but it
was developed
from epidemiological studies, and I'll take you through some of these studies
that shows how we
developed from theory through to what is now known, and the interventions
developed to address
this. But we do also know from the epidemiology that it's the fourth most common
cancer in women
worldwide, and in 2018, estimated that over half a million women were diagnosed
with cervical cancer
worldwide and about 300,000 died from the disease. What we also know is that
there is variation in
the incidence of the death rate of cervical cancer across the globe, and this
really does reflect
the prevention approaches that we've been able to implement across different
regions because of
things like primary prevention approaches, which include HPV vaccinations and
secondary prevention
approaches, which include screening and when diagnosed, is the most successfully
treatable
form of cancer as long as it's detected early and managed effectively. The
problem, as reflected in
globally, is how these prevention measures are implemented in different
countries. So the WHO
now have a worldwide strategy of making cervical cancer eliminated as a public
health problem
within a generation, and so that's based on the epidemiology that we know. And
so what I'm going
to do each week is take you through these different studies that have developed
our knowledge and
understanding. But what I'm going to firstly do is talk not about an actual
study design,
but show you how often we develop hypotheses on different health conditions
through anecdotes and
case series. And you may have seen case series in journal articles where a
doctor might present
I've noticed these five cases of a particular condition. Now it can initiate
further investigation,
but they can often be controversial. But one really positive example is that
anecdotes were
used to first recognise HIV and AIDS. So in the early 1980s in the US, it was
recognised that gay
men in New York and San Francisco were presenting with very rare infections,
very rare cancers.
And clinicians noticed this and started to write papers and discuss this at
conferences,
that there was this particular group of people and they were presenting with
very rare disease
and they didn't know why. And that started the ball rolling on trying to
investigate
what was the cause of these range of conditions under the umbrella of HIV and
AIDS and how
they started to explore the causes of the condition. However, there was also bad
examples
of anecdotes, particularly the controversy around autism and MMR vaccine. And so
the anecdotes were
used that the child had MMR vaccine and then subsequently was diagnosed shortly
after with
autism. And this is a good example of where we don't apply causal criteria to
think that through,
that while this happened before MMR vaccines happened before diagnosis, that
doesn't mean
one causes the other. And that's very important to think about and why we think
about
having causal criteria in what we do and what we're looking at. And this topic
this week is
understanding causality and understanding that different reasons can impact and
cause different conditions. One of the poor consequences of the controversy
around autism
and MMR is that actually vaccination rates were impacted upon. And so there are
pros and cons
to these approaches. So these pros and cons of anecdotes can start the
conversation around what
could be a particular cause of a particular disease. And so they're quick,
they're easy to
perform in a clinic and you can just look at people's records and provides new
previously
unobserved information, both in terms of conditions and risk factors. However,
we do not class these
as scientific and they can't test hypotheses, which we will look at in
developing our research
question. It's really important to think about hypothesis that you have and how
you would look
at that in a research question and how you develop then your research study to
think about that.
But we'll come back to that later. Another con of anecdotes is known as observer
bias.
And we'll come back to different types of bias later in the course,
but observer bias is where you hope to see something and you see it. And that is
definitely the
case of in the MMR autism example. So it's really important that you may
initiate your
research question for your assignment from anecdotes, but it's also important to
step
back and use the causality criteria to think about what information you do have
and don't have.
So why am I talking about anecdotes? Well, that's because in terms of the
cervical cancer
area, this was how we started to understand or start to investigate cervical
cancer.
And it comes from this Italian paper that looked at over 15,000 death
certificates
and found there was a difference between nuns and other people in terms of their
death rates
from uterine cancer. What he interpreted was actually an anecdote in that he
said
nuns don't get cervical cancer. So we're going to take that on further.
What does that actually represent? Is it that it's about marital status?
Or is it because nuns don't marry? Or is it something about sexual activity?
So the anecdote itself might not give you the answer, but it starts the process
of trying to think
about what is the reason why nuns might not get cervical cancer. It's probably
not about marital
status. Is it about sexual activity? And in what context? And so we'll start to
tease out
and look at the different causes of cervical cancer as we look through the
different weeks.
So let's look at this week's topics in learning objectives. It's around risk and
causation.
And these are two of the most important concepts in epidemiology.
If epidemiology is the study of how often a disease occurs in different groups
of people
and we identify reasons for these differences, then we need to understand the
concepts of risk
and causality. We will return to these concepts again and again throughout the
course
and through the different types of studies. And it's the basis for how we then
develop our
research questions. And we use it to understand how often a disease occurs and
reasons why the
chances of developing diseases might happen. Therefore, it's really important
for you to
understand these concepts from an epidemiological framework. Therefore, in this
week's topic,
we will first discuss risks, how they're associated with outcomes, and we'll
discuss
causation in relation to epidemiological studies. You'll then apply causation
criteria to a
particular study. And that's what you're going to discuss in your discussion
group
together with all the tutors. And in the coming weeks, I hope that you'll use
these tools
to reflect on the advantages and disadvantages of different study designs and
examples of
research questions. As you can see in the course content and further reading
I've recommended,
there are different schematics we can use to understand the various causes of
diseases,
especially in chapter five of Raj Bhopal's book Concepts of Epidemiology.
And the idea of these schematics is to reflect on the various risk factors that
might contribute
to a particular health condition and so develop strategies to reduce our risk.
And we can then
start to use these kind of schematics to understand how we would develop our
studies.
And so even if you think of any health condition, we can quickly understand that
it's very rare to think of any that only has one risk factor or cause. Even if
you think of
something like COVID and infectious disease, it might be initially think it's
only caused by one
thing, the coronavirus. However, we then can think of different factors that
might contribute to our
risk of contracting the infection, such as face masks, ventilation, social
distancing and
vaccinations. And then we can then start to think about how uptake and exposure
to these varies.
And these can be related to social economic factors. So this schematic I've got
here is
I use it with colleagues who come to me with research questions to develop
research studies
because it helps us understand the potential factors that might be associated
with a health condition or disease and help us think about potential biases that
can be introduced
in the way that we select our population, the way that we identify and measure
our risk factors
and health outcomes. And as you can see in the schematic outlined and in the
course content,
we have criteria to assess causality and they're provided to help you reflect
and appraise the
evidence we have. It's important to remember that though that these criteria are
not absolutes
and we provide them as a framework as we do with this schematic. Our thinking
about
causality and thinking about this framework are very much linked because we have
to realise
that none of these schematics are perfect, but that they're a starting point to
understand
how we would address these overall questions. And we do that because to bring us
back to
something in fundamentals of epidemiology is that there are many types of bias
and error
inherent in any epidemiological study and whatever study you use, there will be
this bias or error in there. Even if you think of something like an RCT, which
are seen as the gold
standard, there are always errors, there are always variation. And even if you
take the ideal,
which you can see in this slide would be the top left where there's low
variability in error
and unbiased data, we will be able to better measure a mean of blood pressure in
a population,
for example. And we want to reduce the variability and error. We don't want to
see any bias because
if we introduce a bias, what we estimate is not the truth. And you can see in a
schematic of that,
which is where the red dot, the truth, the estimate is away from the truth,
which is in the blue.
And what we also want to do is reduce variation in what we do. And that does
take up most of what
an epidemiologist's time is that we need to understand and identify the impact
and might
mitigate for these different types of bias and error. And that's what you're
going to do in this
course. You're going to concentrate most on is getting you to think of the types
of bias
and error that you might see that occurs in research today. And how can we
address that
in the studies that we design? So when I'm developing a new study, I'm trying to
reduce
the impact of bias and error and developing an analysis that reduces this. So
let's go back to
the cervical cancer case and look at using the schematic that I outlined earlier
to identify
what our population, our risk factor, our outcome and our control or comparison
group would be
interested in if what we know so far is the anecdote that nuns are less likely
to get cervical cancer. Well, if we base our deductions just on that statement,
is the risk factor being a nun? And then would our controls be those that aren't
nuns? Well,
that doesn't make sense that it's the fact that somebody is known for that
occupation,
the risk factor of getting cervical cancer. Or is it something else that makes
the nuns
different from other women? And that's what some of the next studies that we'll
go on to look at
in these webinars look at in terms of they start to look at people's sexual
activity.
So in the course content we've talked about, it's the initial risk factor may
not be the
risk factor that you're interested in. So being a nun, you are celibate. Is that
the protector
against not getting cervical cancer? And so then the risk factor is sexual
activity.
We then move on to what is it about the sexual activity that increases your risk
to cervical
cancer? And we then start to think about who would be our population of
interest? Is it all women?
Well, is it women of a particular age group who are prone to cervical cancer? We
need to understand
is the rates different at different ages? If it is something about sexual
activity,
is it about women who are sexually active? So is it from a certain age onwards?
Do we reduce our
risk of cervical cancer later in life? Because the risk is reduced, the events
have already
happened now. So we'll need to know more information. It might not necessarily
be all women.
In terms of outcomes, we can think of cervical cancer. But how do we define
cervical cancer?
We know there are different stages of cancer. And we also have mentioned earlier
when we talk about
in screening, we look at precancerous cells. Do we define that as cancer? So
it's a good starting
point, the schematic, but it often starts conversations around how you define
these
different terms in the context of your research question. So in the task, you
are asked to look at
that particular paper, maybe look at it in this schematic. It might help you
think through
how they have identified their risk factors, their controls, their outcomes and
their population.
Is it really appropriate? But this is just a starting point. This is to start
you thinking
about cervical cancer, but also to think about research questions. These
schematics are great,
but they are just a starting point. So I hope you've enjoyed that and I hope you
enjoyed Topic 1.